§ 22. THE KNOWABILITY OF GOD. (Cognitio Dei acquisita.)

1. Although there may be no antithesis between the *cognitio Dei insita* and *acquisita*, there is undoubtedly a distinction between the two. Frequently this distinction is conceived such that the first indicates the knowledge of God which is innate to man and accrues to him from his own being, and the second that which is given to man partly from without, from the contemplation of the world, for the increase and extension of the first. But the difference between the two is not thereby indicated clearly and precisely. For in the proper sense there is no knowledge innate, neither of God nor of the world. All knowledge comes from without into man’s consciousness. What is innate is only the faculty of knowledge; but this faculty comes first to action and deed through the operation of the world in and around us. The seed of religion indeed lies in man, but it germinates only in the field of all human life. Just as the eye is brought along with man at his birth yet sees objects first in the light of the sun, so the believer beholds God first in all the works of his hands. Furthermore, it has become clear to us in the previous § that Christian theology has never understood by the innate and in-created nature of the knowledge of God that man brought along any conscious knowledge of God at birth; but it therewith only indicated that the knowledge of God does not need to be brought to man through force or violence, and also not through logical reasoning or compelling proofs, but that it is to man by nature, spontaneous, proper to him of itself. A man, developing normally, comes without force or effort, of himself to some knowledge of God. Therefore the *cognitio Dei insita* also does not stand in opposition to the *acquisita*, for in a broader sense the first can also be called *acquisita*. For to the *cognitio Dei*, both *insita* and *acquisita*, the revelation of God precedes. He does not let himself go unwitnessed. He works with his eternal power and divinity from all sides upon man, not only from without but also from within; in nature and human world, in heart and conscience, in prosperity and adversity God as it were meets man. And this one, created according to God’s image, received the faculty to receive the impressions thereof and thereby to come to some awareness and to some knowledge of the Eternal Being. The *cognitio insita*, as soon as it is *cognitio* and thus not only *potentia* but *actus*, is never otherwise than arisen under the operation of the revelation of God in and outside man and is thus insofar always *acquisita*. For these reasons the distinction between the *cognitio Dei insita* and *acquisita* was formerly usually indicated otherwise. It consisted in these two things. First, therein that the *cognitio Dei innata* was obtained of itself, spontaneously, without effort or force, the *cognitio Dei acquisita* on the other hand by reasoning and argument, by reflection and proof along the *viae causalitatis, eminentiae* and *negationis*; the former was *noetica*, the latter *dianoetica*. And secondly, there also flowed forth from this the difference that the first existed only in principles and was general and necessary, but the second was more worked out and developed, delivered more concrete propositions and was therefore also subjected to all kinds of doubt and contestation. That there is a God stood and stands for nearly all as certain. But the proofs for the existence of God are found by thinking and are therefore alternately despised and highly valued, Moor, Comm. I 41. 44. And therewith the distinction is rightly indicated. It does not lie therein that the innate knowledge of God would arise from man and the acquired from the world. Also the moral proof is derived from the moral consciousness which is found within man. In both it is the same and the whole revelation of God from which the *cognitio Dei* penetrates into our consciousness. But in the *cognitio Dei insita* that revelation works upon the consciousness of man and cultivates there impressions and awarenesses. In the *cognitio Dei acquisita* that revelation of God is reflected upon by man; his understanding goes to work, his reflection awakens, and with clear, lucid consciousness he seeks by reasoning and proof to ascend from the creatures to God. For man in no field of knowledge has enough of impressions and awarenesses. He is not satisfied with consciousness alone. It is not sufficient for him *that* he knows. He also wants to *know* that he knows; he seeks to explain the *how* and *why* of his knowing. And hence, that the ordinary, everyday, empirical knowing always seeks to pass over into the proper, scientific knowing; that faith elevates itself to theology, and the *cognitio Dei insita* completes itself in the *cognitio Dei acquisita*.

2. The division into *cognitio Dei insita* and *acquisita* is usually applied only to the *theologia naturalis*. And this is then distinguished from and often opposed to the *theologia revelata*. Already earlier this view has been extensively contested, I 219–244. There is no separate *theologia naturalis* which outside all revelation could be obtained by man from the thinking contemplation of the world. That knowledge of God which is summarized in the *theologia naturalis* is not a product of human reason. It presupposes first that God himself reveals himself in the works of his hands; it is not man who seeks God, but God who seeks man also through his works in nature. Furthermore, it is not man who with the natural light of reason understands and knows this revelation of God; all religions of the Heathen are positive; but there is from man’s side a sanctified understanding and an opened eye necessary to observe God, the true and living God, in his creatures. And even this is not yet enough. Also the believer, also the Christian would not understand God’s revelation in nature and not be able to represent it purely, if God himself had not described in his Word how and what He reveals of himself in all the world. The *cognitio Dei naturalis* is included in Scripture itself and therein extensively unfolded. Therefore it is also a wholly wrong method that the Christian in the treatment of the *theologia naturalis* as it were divests himself of the special revelation in Scripture and of the illumination of the Holy Spirit, discusses it without any Christian *Voraussetzung*, and thereafter proceeds to the *theologia revelata*. The Christian stands also as dogmatician from the beginning with both feet upon the foundation of special revelation; not first in the *locus de Christo* but also in the *locus de Deo* is he a Christ-believer. But standing thus, he looks around himself, and armed with the spectacles of Holy Scripture he sees in all the world a revelation of that same God whom he in Christ knows and confesses as his Father in the heavens. Then however, by the *cognitio Dei insita* and *acquisita* is not to be understood that knowledge which we obtain outside the special revelation from creation. From our earliest youth God’s special revelation in Christ has worked upon us all; we are born in the covenant of grace and thus as Christians; all kinds of Christian influences have formed the knowledge of God which now is our portion, in much greater measure than the working which has proceeded from God’s revelation in nature upon our heart; and in the light of that special revelation we have all also learned to contemplate nature and the world around us. We all owe the knowledge of God from nature to God’s special revelation in his Word. Nature would let us hear voices just as confused as the Heathen, if we had not hearkened to God’s speech in the works of grace and thereby now understood his voice also in the works of nature. But now that revelation of God in nature is also of high value. It is the same God who speaks to us in nature and in grace, in creation and recreation, in the Logos and in Christ, in the Spirit of God and in the Spirit of Christ. Nature and grace are no opposition; we have one God, from whom and through whom and to whom they both are.

3. This applies to both the *cognitio Dei insita* and *acquisita*; both we owe to Holy Scripture. It is true that this takes no trouble to prove the existence of God. It proceeds from that existence and presupposes that man knows and acknowledges God. It considers man not yet so deeply sunk that he has need of a proof beforehand in order to believe. For he is still God’s image-bearer, God’s offspring, and endowed with a νοῦς to observe in creation God’s eternal power and divinity. The denial of God’s existence is in the eye of Scripture a sign of folly, of deep moral decline, Ps. 14:2. Such people are exception, not rule. Continually Scripture counts upon such who acknowledge the existence of God unconstrained and by virtue of the prompting of their nature. It appeals not to the reasoning understanding, but to the rational and moral consciousness. It does not analyze and argue, but lets God be seen in all the works of his hands. But that it does then indeed. Heaven and earth together with all creatures, leaf and grass, rain and drought, fruitful and unfruitful years, food and drink, health and sickness, riches and poverty, and all things speak to the pious of God. There is no part, no piece of the world in which his power and divinity is not beheld. To heaven and earth, birds and ants, flowers and lilies man is referred, to behold and acknowledge God. Scripture does not reason in the abstract and does not make God the conclusion of a syllogism, leaving it now to us whether we shall find that proof compelling. But it speaks with authority, it proceeds theologically and religiously from God, it lets his virtues be seen in his works and it demands that we shall acknowledge God. An ox knows its owner, and an ass the manger of its lord, but Israel has no knowledge, my people understands not, Jes. 1:3. It is fixed for her that God reveals himself in the creatures and that He does not let himself go unwitnessed to anyone, Hd. 14:17, Rom. 1:19. And thus appealing to the whole creation as a testimony and revelation of God, it contains in germ everything which later was extensively worked out in the proofs and dialectically unfolded. There lies truth in the observation of C. J. Nitzsch, Syst. der Chr. Lehre, 6te Aufl. S. 142, that Holy Scripture gives us a beginning and analogy of the aitiological proof in Rom. 1:20, of the teleological in Ps. 8; 19; Hd. 14:17, of the moral in Rom. 2:14 and of the ontological in Hand. 17:24, Rom. 1:19, 32. But speaking thus, not in dialectical argument but in the language of testimony, not appealing to the reasoning understanding but making an appeal to heart and conscience, to the whole rational and moral consciousness of man, Scripture has never been without power and influence. Also in this is it a powerful word, sharp as a two-edged sharp sword, piercing to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, a judge of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Also without logical argument and philosophical proof is Scripture in this its testimony powerful, because it is the word of God and finds support in the rational and moral nature of every man. It is God himself who does not let himself go unwitnessed to anyone. And it is man himself who, although he was created according to God’s image, must give hearing and assent to this testimony willy-nilly. In this light must also the so-called proofs for God’s existence be regarded. That will preserve us both from overestimation and from contempt of the proofs.
