§ 25. THE PROPER NAMES OF GOD.

1. Among the names of God, those names clearly distinguish themselves in the first place by which He is indicated, designated, addressed as a personal being in distinction from all creatures. All languages possess such names for the Divine being. Although God has no name in Himself, we have need to indicate Him and have for that no other means than a name. Nisi enim nomen scieris, rerum cognitio perit, Isidorus apud Moor I 504. The Greek word θεος, formerly derived from τιθεναι, θεειν, θεασθαι, Suicerus, s.v., M. Vitringa I 134, is nowadays connected by some philologists with Ζευς, Διος, Jupiter, Deus, Diana, Juno, Dio, Dieu; then it is identical with the Sanskrit name dêva, clear heaven and derived from the stem div, to shine, to glitter. The interchange of the designation heaven and God occurs in many languages; the oldest Greek god was called Uranus, certainly identical with the Sanskrit name Varuna; Taengri among the Tartars and Turks, Thian among the Chinese indicates both heaven and God; and also in Scripture the name God is replaced by that of heaven, e.g., in the expression kingdom of the heavens or of God. Another Greek name is δαιμων, from the verb δαιω, and indicates God as distributor and disposer of fate; on the other hand, κυριος, from κυρος, [is] the mighty one, the lord, the owner, the ruler. Our word God is of uncertain origin. It has been connected with the word good; with the Zend khodâ, a se datus, per se ipsum existens; with the Sanskrit gudha or gutha, κευδω, which would indicate God as the hidden one, or with a stem, κοδω, κοσμος, which would mean to order, to arrange, or with the Aryan çuddhas, pure, good, etc., but all these derivations are uncertain. The name Asura among the Indians, and Ahura among the Persians indicates God as the living one. Cf. Kluge, Etymol. Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache, s. v. Gott. Cremer, Wört. der neut. Gr. s.v. Herzog² 5, 290. Hoekstra, Wĳsg. Godsd. I 309 S.

2. Scripture speaks many times of the name of God in a very broad sense. The Jews therefore counted no fewer than seventy of them, Eisenmenger, Entdecktes Judenthum I 455; and in Christian theology the perfections of God were also initially included under the names of God. But gradually a distinction arose; already Hieronymus limited the names of God to ten, namely El, Elohim, Elohe, Tzebaoth, Eljon, Escher ehje, Adonai, Iah, Ihvh, Schaddai, and was followed therein by many, Alsted, Theol. schol. 71 sq. Moor, I 511. The simplest name by which God is indicated in Holy Scripture is ‎‏אֵל‏‎. There is disagreement regarding the derivation. Lagarde connects the word with the root ‎‏אלי‏‎ and the preposition ‎‏אל‏‎ and thinks that the word indicates God as the one who is the goal and object of human desire. But this derivation is as improbable as that which connects the word with ‎‏אֵלָה‏‎, the sacred tree. According to the vast majority, the word is derived from the stem ‎‏אוּל‏‎, either in the meaning of being in front, the first, being lord (Nöldeke), or in that of being strong, mighty (Gesenius), literature in M. Vitringa I 132. Moor I 515 sq. Schultz, Altt. Theol. 508. Smend, Altt. Theol. 26. The name ‎‏אֱלוֹהַּ‏‎ plural ‎‏אלהים‏‎ is derived from the same stem ‎‏אול‏‎ or from ‎‏אלה‏‎, to fear, and thus makes God known either as the strong one or as object of dread and fear. The singularis is little used and poetic, e.g., Ps. 18:32, Job 3:4; on the other hand, the pluralis is the ordinary name for God. This pluralis is not to be explained as a pluralis majestatis, because this is nowhere customary in Scripture regarding God; neither can an indication of the Trinity be seen in it, as has been done by many since Lombardus, Sent. I dist. 2, Zanchius, Op. I 25. Voetius, Disp. V 27. M. Vitringa I 209 sq., for Elohim has almost always the adjective and the verb with it in the singulari, Augustinus, de trin. II 11. Bellarminus, de Christo, c. 6. Calvĳn, Inst. I 13, 9. Gomarus, Theses Theol., disp. 5. Moor I 796. The modern critics mostly see in it a remnant of the earlier polytheism, but this explanation encounters not only the same objection as the earlier Trinitarian one, but has also, as appears from later investigations, been customary outside Israel as a name for one single God, Noordtzĳ, Oost. Lichtstralen over West. Schriftbeschouwing 1897 bl. 41 v. Therefore this pluralis is better understood as a pluralis der abstractie (Ewald), or as a pluralis der quantiteit, which, like ‎‏מים‏‎ and ‎‏שׁמים‏‎, indicates a boundless magnitude (Oehler), or as an intensieve pluralis, which indicates a fullness of power (Delitzsch). Several times Elohim is constructed with an adjectivum or verbum in the plurali, Gen. 20:13, 28:13 v., 35:7, Ex. 32:4, 8, Joz. 24:19, 1 Sam. 4:8, 17:26, 2 Sam. 7:23, 1 Kon. 12:28, Ps. 58:12, 121:5, Job 35:10, Jeremia 10:10; and a similar pluralis is also to be observed in the pron. personale, Gen. 1:26, 3:22, 11:7, Jes. 6:8, 41:22, in ‎‏קדשׁים‏‎, Spr. 9:10, Hos. 12:1, ‎‏עשׂים‏‎, Job 35:10, Jes. 54:5, ‎‏בראים‏‎ Pred. 12:1, Ps. 149:2, and in ‎‏אֲדֹנָי‏‎. All these plural forms indicate God as the fullness of life and power. Durch Elohim wird das göttliche Wesen in seinem Urverhältniss und in seinem stetigen Grundverhältniss zur Welt bezeichnet. Es ist eine Verhältnissbestimmung, nicht eine unmittelbare innere Wesensbestimmung, und zwar ist es Bestimmung des absoluten Hoheitsbegriffs in Bezug auf die ganze Welt, Beck, Gl. II 22, cf. literature in M. Vitringa I 133, Moor I 518, Oehler, Theol. § 36, Schultz, Altt. Th. 516. The name ‎‏עֶלְיוֹן‏‎, LXX ὑψιστος, indicates God as the High One, Exalted above all; He occurs in the mouth of Melchizedek, Gen. 14:18, of Bileam, Num. 24:16, of the king of Babylon, Jes. 14:14, cf. also Mk. 5:7, Luk. 1:32, 35, Hd. 16:17 and furthermore especially in poetry. ‎‏אֲדֹנָי‏‎, alternating with ‎‏האדון‏‎, which is again intensified to ‎‏אדון אדונים‏‎ or ‎‏אדון כל הארץ‏‎, makes God known as the Lord, to whom everything is subject and against whom man stands as a servant, Gen. 18:27. In earlier times God was also called ‎‏בַּעַל‏‎ in this same sense, Hos. 2:18, but later this name received an idolatrous character and therefore fell out of use, Robertson, Israels oude godsdienst bl. 200 v. All these names are not yet nomina propria in a stricter sense; they are also used of the idols, of men, Gen. 33:10, Ex. 7:1, 4:16, and of the authorities, Ex. 12:12, 21:5, 6, 22:7, Lev. 19:32, Num. 33:4, Richt. 5:8, 1 Sam. 2:25, Ps. 58:2, 82:1, but they are nevertheless the ordinary names by which God is designated and addressed. They are also generally Semitic names, which make God known in His exaltation above all creatures. The Semites gladly call God Lord, King; they feel themselves deeply dependent upon Him and bow themselves humbly, as servants, before Him, yet they express in those names no philosophical view regarding the essence of God but place His relation to creatures, particularly to men, in the foreground.

3. This high, exalted God however also descends from His transcendence to the creature. He reveals Himself not only generally through creation to all nations, but has also made Himself known in a particular sense to Israel. The first name by which God now appears in the special revelation is that of ‎‏שַׁדַּי‏‎ or ‎‏אֵל שַׁדַּי‏‎. As such God reveals Himself to Abraham, when He establishes him as a father of many nations and seals His covenant with circumcision, Gen. 17:1. In the time of the patriarchs this name therefore also occurs repeatedly, Gen. 28:3, 35:11, 43:14, 48:3, 49:25, Ex. 6:3, Num. 24:4, but furthermore also in Job, in some psalms and a few times among the prophets. In the N. Test. it is rendered by παντοκρατωρ, 2 Cor. 6:18, Op. 4:8 etc. The origin of the name is still obscure. Nöldeke has derived it from ‎‏שַׁד‏‎, lord, and vocalized it as ‎‏שֵׁדַי‏‎, but as appears from Gen. 43:14, 49:25, Ezech. 10:5 the name is nevertheless undoubtedly an adjectivum. Formerly it was derived from ‎‏שׁ‏‎ for ‎‏אשׁר‏‎ and ‎‏דַי‏‎, ἱκανος, and then translated as qui est sufficiens, all-sufficient; or from ‎‏שׁדד‏‎ in the meaning of being strong, destroying; or also from ‎‏שׁדה‏‎ or ‎‏אשׁד‏‎ to pour out, so that God is thereby indicated as the one who abundantly communicates all things. Everywhere, however, the concept of power and invincible strength stands in the foreground with this name, and Jes. 13:6 brings, even if only in a play on words, this name into connection with ‎‏שׁדד‏‎, to destroy, cf. Joel 1:15. Therefore this name makes God known to us as the one who possesses all power and thus can break all resistance and make everything subservient to His will. While Elohim is the God of creation and of nature, El-Shaddai is the God who subordinates all forces of that nature to and employs them in the service of grace, cf. annotation on Gen. 17:1, Zanchius, Op. II 43. M. Vitringa I 132. Moor I 522 sq. Oehler, Theol. § 37. Delitzsch on Gen. 17:1 etc. In this name the θειοτης and αιδιος δυναμις of God is no longer an object of dread and fear, but a source of salvation and comfort. God gives Himself to His people and stands with His invincible power for the fulfillment of His promises, for the maintenance of His covenant. Therefore He is henceforth also repeatedly called the God of Abraham, Gen. 24:12, Izak, Gen. 28:13, Jakob, Ex. 3:6, the God of the fathers, Ex. 3:13, 15, the God of the Hebrews, Ex. 3:18, the God of Israel, Gen. 33:20, and in Jesaia frequently the Holy One of Israel. God is the Exalted One, Creator of heaven and earth, the Almighty, but who at the same time also stands in a special, gracious relation to His people.

As God of grace, however, He appears especially in the name ‎‏יהוה‏‎. The Jews called this name the name par excellence, the essential name, the proper name, the glorious name, the name of four letters, τετραγραμματον, etc., and deduced from Lev. 24:16 and Ex. 3:15, where one read ‎‏לְעֹלָם‏‎, to conceal, that it was forbidden to pronounce it. It is unknown when this opinion arose among the Jews. But it is certain that the LXX regularly read Adonai and therefore rendered the name by κυριος; other translations followed this example and translated the name by Dominus, The Lord, der Herr, HEERE, Syn. Dordr. sess. 12 etc., French has l’Éternel. Thereby the original, correct pronunciation has also been lost. The church fathers called the name ἀπορρητον, ἀλεκτον, ἀφραστον, probably not because they held the pronunciation of this name to be unlawful, but because the Jews so judged and the pronunciation was actually lost, Moor I 534, Buddeus, Inst. theol. dogm. I 188. In Greek the four letters were written as ΠΙΠΙ, or also according to Diodorus Siculus and Origenes represented by Ιαω or Ιαη, according to Hieronymus by Jaho, according to Philo Byblius by Ιευω, according to Clemens Alex. by Ιαου. Theodoretus relates that the Jews pronounced Αϊα and the Samaritans Ιαβε. All this points back to an old pronunciation Iahveh, Schultz, Altt. Theol.⁴ 523. With appeal to the tradition among the Jews, the name was pronounced by some as Jeve, e.g., by Joachim van Floris in his Evangelium aeternum. Indeed this interpunctie is to be found in Samuel b. Meir, and it was later still defended by Hottinger, Reland e. a., Delitzsch, Neuer Comm. über die Genesis 1887 S. 546 f. The pronunciation Jehovah is of recent date: it gained entrance especially through the Franciscan Petrus Galatinus, who was however contested by many, o. a. by Genebrardus, Petavius, de Deo VIII c. 9, Herzog² 4, 173. Later men such as Drusius, Amama, Scaliger, Vriemoet e. a. also maintained that the pronunciation Jehovah could not be the true one, but had borrowed the vowels from Adonai, Voetius, Disp. V 55, cf. literature in M. Vitringa I 130. In reality this interpunctie is burdened by very serious objections. In the first place, Ihvh is in the Hebrew Bible a keri perpetuum and has now the vowels of Adonai, then those of Elohim; furthermore, the form Jehovah is un-Hebraic and inexplicable; and finally this interpunctie dates from a time when the Jews had long considered the pronunciation of the name forbidden. If this vocalisatie is now incorrect, the question arises how then the name is to be explained. The assertion that it is of Egyptian origin (Voltaire, Schiller, Wegscheider, Heeren, Brugsch), is contradicted by Ex. 5:2 and finds hardly any defense anymore. Also the opinion of Hartmann, Bohlen, Colenso, Dozy, Land, that it is Canaanite or Phoenician and was adopted by the Israelites after their entry into Canaan, has proven untenable and decisively refuted, Kuenen, G. v. I. I 397-401. Valeton, De Isr. Godsnamen, Theol. Stud. VII 1889 bl. 173-221, especially bl. 176 v. The Israelite origin of the name may therefore be considered established. Then, however, there is also no doubt possible whether it comes from the stem ‎‏הוה‏‎ or ‎‏היה‏‎, and there is, since the pronunciation of Jaho, advocated by von Hartmann, Religionsphilos. I 370 f., cannot be considered, Kuenen, Volksgodsd. en Wereldgodsd. 261 v., only still disagreement whether it is a 3 pers. impf. of kal or of hiphil. The last explanation is defended by Gesenius, Schrader, Lagarde, Schultz, Land, Kuenen, G. v. I. I 275, actually only on the ground that such an exalted concept of God, as would be expressed in the kal-form, was not yet conceivable in the time of Moses. The name Jahveh would then not mean, He who is, but He, who causes to be, who gives life, Creator. But Smend, Altt. Rel. Gesch. 21 rightly says from his standpoint that this name is still much too high for that time; and he calls this explanation also therefore improbable, because the hiphil of the verb ‎‏הוה‏‎ never occurs. Thus only the derivation remains which is given of the name in Ex. 3. Yet there is still disagreement then also regarding the meaning of the name. The church fathers thought with this name especially of the aseitas; God was the being, the eternal, unchangeable being over against the οὐκ Ὀν of the idols and the μη ὀν of the creatures. Others, such as W. R. Smith, Smend t. a. p. 21, appeal to Ex. 3:12, and interpret the name as He, who _with you_ shall be. Both interpretations are unacceptable; the latter, because the addition with you, ‎‏עִמָּך‏‎, could then not be absent, and the former, because it sounds too philosophical and finds no support in Ex. 3 either. For in verses 13-15 the meaning of the name is clearly indicated. In full it reads ‎‏אֶהְיֶה אֲשֶׁר אֶהְיֶה‏‎; and therewith the Lord says that He, who now calls Moses and wants to redeem His people, is the same as the one who appeared to their fathers. He is who He is, yesterday and today the same in eternity. More closely this meaning is brought to light in verse 15: Ihvh, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, Izak and Jakob sends Moses, and that is His name eternally. God does not here call Himself the being without more and gives no explanation of His aseitas, but He expressly says, what and how He is. How and what shall He then be? That cannot be said in one word, that cannot be described by one single predicate, but He shall be who He shall be. Everything is enclosed therein; general and indefinite is this predicate but therefore also so rich and deep in meaning. He shall be, who He has been for the patriarchs, who He is now, who He shall remain; He shall be everything for His people. It is no new and no strange God, who comes to them through Moses, but it is the God of the fathers, the unchangeable, the constant, the faithful, the ever self-consistent, who does not abandon or forsake His people, but always seeks them out again and redeems them, unchangeable in His grace, in His love, in His help, who shall be what He is, because He is always Himself; ‎‏אני הוא‏‎ therefore He calls Himself in Isaiah, the first and the last, ch. 41:4. 43:10, 13, 25. 44:6. 48:12. Naturally the aseitas lies at the foundation here, but it does not nevertheless come to the foreground and is not expressed directly in the name. From this explanation it also appears, whether and to what extent the name Ihvh was already known before the time of Moses. Ex. 6:3 does not say that the name as name was then communicated to Moses, but that the Lord was not known to the fathers with or with respect to His name. The name is therefore also already found repeatedly before Ex. 6, occurs in many proper names, such as Jochebed, Achĳa, Abĳa, 1 Chron. 2:24, 25, and could therefore also not be a completely new name, because Moses, in order to find hearing with his people, had to appear precisely not with a strange name but in the name of the God of the fathers, Ex. 3:12. The intention of Ex. 6:3 can therefore be none other than that the sense and meaning of this name was first made known to Moses by the Lord Himself at that time. And this is indeed also so. Only in Ex. 3 does the Lord Himself give an explanation of this name; here He says, how He wants this name to be understood. The name already existed earlier, was also already then repeatedly used by the Lord Himself, Gen. 15:7, 28:13, and used as a name of address, Gen. 14:22, 24:3, 28:16, 15:2, 8, 32:9. But nowhere is an explanation of that name given. In the abstract it is quite possible that the name Ihvh originally, according to its derivation, meant something entirely different than is said in Ex. 3. Ex. 3 gives no etymology, no word-explanation, but a matter-explanation. Just as God in His special revelation to Israel took over all kinds of religious customs, circumcision, sabbath, offering, priesthood, etc., and gave a special meaning to them, so He has also done with this name. Abstracting from origin and original meaning, the Lord says in Ex. 6, how and in what sense He is Iahveh, the I shall be who I shall be. The name Ihvh is from now on the description and the guarantee of this, that God is and remains the God of His people, unchangeable in His grace and faithfulness. And that could also only now, in Moses' time, come out. Precisely a long time had to pass, in order to prove that God was faithful and unchangeable; one's faithfulness can only be tested in the long run and especially in times of misery. So it was with Israel. Centuries had passed after the time of the patriarchs; Israel was oppressed and sat down in misery. And now God says: I am who I am, Iahveh, the unchangeably faithful, the God of the fathers, the God also now still of you and to eternity. Now God lays a completely new meaning in an old name, which can also only now be understood by the people. And therefore Ihvh is Israel's God from the land of Egypt onward, Hos. 12:10, 13:4.
