§ 26. THE ESSENTIAL NAMES OF GOD.


A. God as the Being.


1. With some, the locus de trinitate precedes that concerning the virtues of God. Damascenus, de fide orthod. I 6 sq., Lombardus, Sent. I dist. 2 sq., Bonaventura, Brevil. I c. 2 sq., Martyr, Loci Comm. p. 36 sq. etc.; and Frank has even raised serious objection against the reversed order, Syst. der chr. Wahrh. I 151 f. If with the treatment of the virtues of God before the doctrine of the Trinity it were intended, gradually to ascend from the theologia naturalis to the theologia revelata and from the natural to the Christian concept of God, it would without doubt deserve disapproval. But this is by no means the case. In the doctrine of the perfections of God the Divine nature is treated, as it is revealed to us in Scripture, confessed by the Christian faith, and will soon appear in the locus de trinitate to exist in a threefold manner. In order to understand in that locus that Father, Son and Spirit share the same Divine nature, it is necessary to know what that Divine nature contains in itself and wherein it is distinguished from all created nature. Scripture also precedes us therein. The being of God is taught us there earlier and more clearly than His trinitarian existence; the Trinity comes first to clear revelation in the N. Test.; the names Ihvh, Elohim precede those of Father, Son and Spirit. The first thing that Scripture causes us to know of God is, that He has a peculiar, distinct from all creatures, self-subsistent and independent being and life. He has a peculiar being, a peculiar φυσις, natura, substantia, essentia, not in distinction from His virtues, but approaching us and becoming known in all virtues and perfections. He bears peculiar names, which belong to no creature. Among these the name of Ihvh stands at the head, Ex. 3:14. By this name He is indicated as the One who is and shall be what He was, who eternally remains identical to Himself in relation to His people. He exists from Himself. He existed before all things, and these exist only through Him, Ps. 90:2, 1 Cor. 8:6, Apoc. 4:11. He is ‎‏אָדוֹן‏‎ κυριος, δεσποτης in an absolute sense, Lord of the whole earth, Ex. 23:17, Deut. 10:17, Josh. 3:13. He is from nothing, everything is dependent upon Him, Rom. 11:36. He kills and makes alive, creates light and darkness, peace and evil, Deut. 32:39, Isa. 45:5-7, 54:16. He does with the host of heaven and the inhabitants of the earth according to His will, Dan. 4:35, so that men are in His hand as clay in the hand of the potter, Isa. 64:8, Jer. 18:1 f., Rom. 9:21. His counsel, His good pleasure is the ultimate ground of all that is and happens, Ps. 33:11, Prov. 19:21, Isa. 46:10, Matt. 11:26, Acts 2:23, 4:28, Eph. 1:5, 9, 11. He also does all things for His own sake, for His name's, for His glory's sake, Deut. 32:27, Josh. 7:9, 1 Sam. 12:22, Ps. 25:11, 31:4, 79:9, 106:8, 109:21, 143:11, Prov. 16:4, Isa. 48:9, Jer. 14:7, 21, Ezek. 20:9, 14, 22, 44. He also has need of nothing, is self-sufficient, Job 22:2, 3, Ps. 50:19 f., Acts 17:25, and has life in Himself, John 5:26. And thus He is the first and the last, the alpha and the omega, who is and who was and who is to come, Isa. 41:4, 44:6, 48:12, Apoc. 1:8 etc.; absolutely independent, not only in His existence, but in consequence thereof also in all His virtues and perfections, in all His decrees and acts. Independent is He in His understanding, Rom. 11:34, 35, in His will, Dan. 4:35, Rom. 9:19, Eph. 1:5, Apoc. 4:11, in His counsel, Ps. 33:11, Isa. 46:10, in His love, Hos. 14:5, in His power, Ps. 115:3 etc. And thus self-sufficient in Himself, and receiving nothing from outside Himself, He is on the contrary the only fountain of all being and life, of all light and love, the abundant fount of all good, Ps. 36:10, Acts 17:25. This independence of God is more or less acknowledged by all men. The heathens do indeed drag the divine down into the creaturely and teach a theogony, but behind and above their gods they nevertheless often assume a power to which everything is subjected in an absolute sense. Many speak of nature, chance, fate or fortune as a power elevated above all; and philosophers indicate God preferably with the name of the Absolute. In Christian theology this virtue of God bore the name of αὐυταρκεια, aseitas, omnisufficientia, independentia, magnitudo. In the East one spoke of θεος ἀναρχος, ἀναιτιος, ἀγεννητος and one called God preferably αὐτογεννητος, αὐτοφυης, αὐτουσιος, αὐτοθεος, αὐτοφως, αὐτοσοφια, αὐτοαρετη, αὐταγαθος etc., cf. Suicerus, Thes. Eccl. s. v. God is all that He is through Himself. He is ipsa per se bonitas, sanctitas, sapientia, vita, lux, veritas etc. As was said earlier, the church fathers in imitation of Philo proceeded mostly from the name Ihvh in describing God. That was His essential name par excellence. God was the Being. In this name: I shall be who I shall be lies everything enclosed. All other virtues of God were derived from it. God is summum esse, summum bonum, summum verum, summum pulchrum. He is the perfect, the highest good being, quo esse aut cogitari melius nihil possit. He has the whole being in Himself, He is an infinite and boundless sea of being. Si bonum, si magnum, si beatum, si sapientem vel quidquid tale de Deo dixeris, in hoc verbo instauratur quod est Est. Nempe hoc est ei esse, quod haec omnia esse. Si et centum talia addas, non recessisti ab esse; si ea dixeris, nihil addixisti; si non dixeris nihil minuisti, Bernardus, de consid. I c. 6. Scholasticism joined itself to this, Anselmus, Monol. 6. Lombardus, Sent. I dist. 8. Thomas, S. Theol. I qu. 2 art. 3 and qu. 3 and qu. 13 art. 11. S. c. Gent. I c. 16 sq. and treated this virtue also under the name of the infinitas or spiritualis magnitudo Dei, Thomas, S. Theol. I qu. 7. S. c. Gent. I c. 43, or under that of the aseitas Dei, whereby was indicated that God as summa substantia per se ipsam aut ex se ipsa est quidquid est, Anselmus, Monol. 6. Later Roman theologians proceed likewise mostly from this aseitas or independentia, Petavius, de Deo I c. 6. Theol. Wirceb. III p. 38 sq. Perrone, Prael. theol. II p. 88-90. Jansen, Prael. theol. dogm. II 26 sq. The Reformation brought no change herein. Also Luther describes God on the ground of the name Ihvh as the absolute being; He is pure being. But yet Luther does not long occupy himself with abstract, metaphysical descriptions and proceeds soon from the Deus absconditus to the Deus revelatus in Christus, Köstlin, Luthers Theol. II 302 f. Melanchthon in his Loci describes God as essentia spiritualis. The Lutherans have mostly taken over this description but then often added the further determination infinita, a se subsistens or independens to it, Schmid, Dogm. der ev. Luth. K. § 17. With the Reformed this perfection of God comes to the fore still more strongly, although the name aseitas is later mostly exchanged for that of independentia. Aseitas only expresses the independence of God in His existence, but independentia has a broader sense and includes that God is independent in everything, in His being, in His virtues, in His decrees, in His works. While earlier ones therefore proceed mostly from the name Ihvh, Hyperius, Meth. Theol. p. 87, 135. Sohnius, Op. II 48. III 261. Polanus, Synt. Theol. p. 135 etc., later independentia appears mostly as the first of the incommunicable properties, Mastricht, Theol. II c. 3, Heidegger, Corpus Theol. III § 30. Maresius, Syst. theol. loc. 2 § 17. Marck, Merg der Godg. IV § 20. L. Meyer, Verhand. over de Godd. eigensch. 1783 I bl. 39-110 etc. If now in Scripture God ascribes this aseitas to Himself, then He thereby makes Himself known as the absolute being, as the being in an absolute sense. By this perfection He is immediately essentially and absolutely distinguished from all creature. For every creature is not a se but ab alio, and is and has thus nothing of itself; it is absolutely dependent in its origin and thus also in all its further existence and development. But God appears by this name to be from Himself alone, a se, not in the sense as if He had caused Himself, but as from eternity to eternity being who He is, being not becoming, the absolute being, the fullness of being, and thus also eternal and absolutely independent in His existence, in His virtues, in all His works, the first and the last, sole cause and final end of all things. In this aseitas of God all other virtues lie enclosed; they are given with it and are from it the rich, manifold unfolding. And yet, while in this virtue the immeasurable distinction between Creator and creature appears at once clearly and plainly, there is nevertheless also of this perfection of God a weak likeness in every creature. Pantheism cannot acknowledge this, but theism confesses that the creature, though absolutely dependent, nevertheless has a proper, distinct being. And in this being the perseverance in its existence is implanted, the conatus in suo esse perseverandi, the Selbsterhaltungstrieb, the drive for self-preservation. Every creature, insofar as it is, fears death; and even the smallest atom offers resistance to every attempt at annihilation. It is a shadow of the independent, immutable being of our God.


2. From the aseitas of God flows spontaneously His immutability. Yet this seems to find little support in Scripture. For there God stands constantly in the most lively intercourse with the world. In the beginning He created heaven and earth and thus passed from not-creating to creating. And from that beginning He lives as it were the life of the world and especially of His people Israel together with them, He comes and He goes, He reveals and hides Himself, He turns His face away and turns it again in grace. He repents, Gen. 6:6, 1 Sam. 15:11, Amos 7:3, 6, Joel 2:13, Jonah 3:9, 4:2, and changes His purpose, Ex. 32:10-14, Jonah 3:10. He becomes angry, Num. 11:1, 10, Ps. 106:40, Zech. 10:3, and lays aside His anger, Deut. 13:17, 2 Chron. 12:12, 30:8, Jer. 18:8, 10, 26:3, 19, 36:3. He is different toward the pious than toward the godless, Prov. 11:20, 12:22; toward the pure He shows Himself pure but toward the froward He shows Himself a wrestler, Ps. 18:26, 27. In the fullness of time He even becomes man in Christ and goes through the Holy Spirit to dwell in the church; He rejects Israel and accepts the Gentiles. And in the life of the children of God there remains a continual alternation of feeling of guilt and consciousness of forgiveness, of experiences of God's wrath and of His love, of His desertion and of His nearness. But at the same time the same Scripture testifies that God under all that is the same and remains the same. Everything changes but He remains standing, He remains who He is, Ps. 102:26-28. He is Ihvh, the being and Himself ever remaining identical; the first and with the last still the same God, Isa. 41:4, 43:10, 46:4, 48:12. He is who He is, Deut. 32:39, cf. John 8:58, Hebr. 13:8, ἀφθαρτος, ὁ μονος ἐχων ἀθανασιαν, always ὁ αἰτος, Rom 1:23, 1 Tim. 1:17, 6:16, Hebr. 1:11, 12. And immutable in His existence and being, is He also in His thought and will, in all His purposes and decrees. He is not a man that He should lie or repent. What He says, He does, Num. 15:29, 1 Sam. 15:29. His charismata and calling are ἀμεταμελητα, Rom. 11:29. He does not cast off His people, Rom. 11:1. He completes what He began, Ps. 138:8, Phil. 1:6. In one word, He, Ihvh, changes not, Mal. 3:6; with Him οὐκ ἐνι παραλλαγη ἢ τροπης ἀποσκιασμα, Jas. 1:17. Upon this was built in Christian theology the doctrine of the immutabilitas Dei. The mythological theogony could not raise itself to this height, but philosophy named and described God many times as the sole, eternal, immutable, unmoved ruler of all things, self-identical, Philolaus and others, in Zeller, Phil. d. Gr. I⁴ 425, 488 f. II 928. Aristotle concluded from the movement of the world to a primum movens, an αἰδιος οὐσια ἀκινητος, which was one and eternal, necessary, immutable, free from all composition, without any possibility, ὑλη, δυναμις, but solely ἐνεργεια, pure εἰδος, pure being, absolute form, το τι ην εἰναι το πρωτον, ib 359-365. Philo called God ἀτρεπτος, ἰσαιτατος ἑαυτῳ, ἀκλινης, παγιος, βεβαιος, ἀμεταβλητος, ἑστως, Dähne, Gesch. Darst. der jüd.-alex. Rel. Philos. I 118. And with this Christian theology agreed. God is according to Irenaeus, semper idem, sibi aequalis et similis, adv. haer. IV c. 11, cf. Orig. c. Cels. I 21. IV 14. With Augustine the immutability of God flowed directly from the fact that He was the highest, perfect being. To every rational creature it is naturaliter et veraciter insitum, esse omnino incommutabilem et incorruptibilem Deum, de Gen. ad litt. VII 11. Through the senses this concept of an eternal and immutable being cannot be obtained, for every creature, also man himself, is mutable; but within himself he sees and finds that immutable, which is better and greater than all that changes, de lib. arb. II 6, de doctr. chr. I 9. If God were not immutable, He would not be God, Conf. VII 4. His name is _being_ and this name is a nomen incommutabilitatis. All that changes ceases to be what it was. But true being is only the portion of Him who does not change. What truly is, remains. Quod est, manet. But what changes fuit aliquid et aliquid erit; non tamen est, quia mutabile est, de trin. V 2. God however, who is, cannot change, because every change would be a diminution of His being. And as immutable as God is in His being, is He also in His knowing, willing and decreeing. Dei essentia, qua est, nihil mutabile habet, nec in aeternitate, nec in veritate, nec in voluntate, de trin. IV prooem. As He is, so He knows and wills, in an immutable manner. Essentia tua scit et vult incommutabiliter et scientia tua est et vult incommutabiliter et tua voluntas est et scit incommutabiliter, Conf. XIII, 16. Creation, revelation, incarnation, affections etc. brought about no change in God. In God there never came a novum consilium, de ord. II 17. There is always in God one single, immutable will. Una eademque sempiterna et immutabili voluntate res quas condidit, et ut prius non essent egit, quamdiu non fuerunt, et ut posterius essent, quando esse coeperunt, de civ. XII, 17. Only there is change in the creature from non-being to being, from good to evil etc. The same thought we then find later repeatedly, with John Damascenus, de fide orthod. I c. 8. Thomas, S. Theol. I qu 9. Lombardus, Sent. I dist. 8, 3. Bonaventura, Sent. I dist. 8 art. 2 qu 1-2. Petavius, de Deo III c. 1-2. and thus also with Lutheran and Reformed theologians, Gerhard, Loc. II cap. 8 sect. 5. Zanchius, Op. II col. 77-83. Polanus, Synt. theol. II c. 13, cf. Conf. Gall. art. 1. Conf. Belg. 1 etc.

But this immutability of God found much opposition, as much from the deistic as from the pantheistic side. With Epicurus the gods are entirely like excellent men, who change of place, activity, thought etc., Zeller IV 430 f., and with the Stoa the Deity was, as earlier with Heraclitus, taken up as the immanent cause of the world into its ceaseless alternation, ib. IV 133 f. Of the same nature was the opposition to the immutability of God in Christian theology. On the one side stands Pelagianism, Socinianism, Remonstrantism, rationalism, which especially contests the immutability of God's knowledge and will, and makes the will of God dependent upon and thus changeable according to the conduct of man. Especially Vorstius in his work de Deo et ejus attributis contested the immutability of God. He distinguished between the essentia of God, which is simple and immutable, and the voluntas Dei, which as libera also does not will everything eternally and not always the same, Dorner, Gesammelte Schriften 278. But much more serious is still the opposition to the immutability of God, from the pantheistic side. Common to this opposition is that the idea of becoming is transferred to God and thus the boundary between Creator and creature is entirely obliterated. The idea of God as substantia, as it occurs with Spinoza, proved to be an abstract concept without content. To bring life into that concept, philosophy often replaced being by becoming. Naturally there is yet great difference here, according as one conceives this process, whereby God Himself becomes, unitarily or trinitarily, and lets it take place immanent in the being of God or transeunt in the world. To this belongs in the first place Gnosticism, but then further the theosophy of the Kabbalah, of Böhme, Baader, Schelling, Rothe, Hamberger, etc., working on in the doctrine of the kenosis, and finally the pantheistic philosophy of Fichte, Hegel, Schleiermacher, Schopenhauer, Hartmann etc. However differently worked out, the fundamental thought is one. God _is_ not but _becomes_. An sich, in the first moment, is He βυθος ἀγνωστος, an abstract purely potential being, nature without more, contentless thought, a dark urge, a blind alogical will, in one word, a being that is nothing but can become all. But out of that potential being God brings Himself in the form of a process gradually to actuality. He is His own Creator. He produces Himself. He comes gradually, whether then in Himself or in the world, to personality, to self-consciousness, to spirit. God is causa sui. Under the influence of this philosophical idea of the absolute becoming the immutability of God has also in modern theology often been denied or limited, and God with predilection called causa sui, self-actualizing power, Rothe, Theol. Ethik § 16-38. Martensen, Chr. Dogm. 1856 S. 86. 116, cf. Chr. Ethik. I 90 f. Luthardt says, Gott ist seine eigene That, Apol. Vortr. über die Grundwahrh. des Chr. 1870 I 45, cf. Müller, Die chr. Lehre v. d. Sünde II⁵ 171 f. Others speak of a Selbstsetzung Gottes, Dorner, Chr. Gl. I 244. 245. Frank, Syst. der chr. Wahrh. I² 116 f. In his treatise Ueber die richtige Fassung des dogm. Begriffs der Unveränderlichkeit Gottes, Ges. Schriften 1883 S. 188-377, Dorner seeks to avoid both deism and pantheism (akosmism) and to unite the immutability and the Lebendigkeit of God with one another. He thinks to reach this goal by placing the immutability of God in the ethical, S. 340 f. Ethically God is immutable and always self-identical, He remains holy love, S. 352. But otherwise Dorner thinks that through creation, incarnation and satisfaction etc. change has indeed come in God, S. 309. 311 f. 358 f. 364, that He stands in Wechselverhältniss to man, S. 319. 362, that He knows reality only from the world, S. 320, that there is also for Him a past, present and future, S. 322, that He becomes angry, justifies, and has a mood corresponding to man, S. 324 etc. And thus also essentially Weisse, Philos. Dogm. I 573. F. A. B. Nitzsch, Ev. Dogm. 365 et al. Many also in the doctrine of God do not express themselves on this important property, but let it appear first at creation or at the incarnation or at the kenosis etc. that they assume change in God, such as e.g. Ebrard, Hofmann, Thomasius etc.

Nevertheless the doctrine of the immutability of God is of the highest importance for religion. The distinction between Creator and creature lies in the opposition of being and becoming. All that is creature is becoming. It is mutable, strives continually, seeks after rest and satisfaction and finds that rest only in Him, who is pure being without becoming. Therefore God is called in Scripture so often the rock, Deut. 32:4, 15, 18, 30, 31, 37. 1 Sam. 2:2, 2 Sam. 22:3, 32, Ps. 19:15, 31:3, 62:3, 7, 73:26 etc. Upon Him man can rely, He changes not in His being, nor in His knowing or willing, He remains who He is eternally. Every change is foreign to God. There is in Him no change of time, for He is eternal; nor of place for He is omnipresent; nor also of being for He is pure being. Christian theology also expressed this last often by the term purus actus. Aristotle had thus conceived the being of God, as πρωτον εἰδος without any δυναμις, as absolute ἐνεργεια. Therefore scholasticism went to speak of God as actus purissimus et simplicissimus, to indicate that He is the perfect, absolute being without any potentia to non-being or to other-being. Thus says Boethius, de cons. philos. lib. III, that God changes not of being (forma), quia purus actus est, cf. Thomas, S. Theol. I qu. 3. Therefore also the expression causa sui was avoided of God. The idea of the absolute becoming is first clearly expressed by Heraclitus and then repeatedly returned in philosophy. Especially Plotinus makes use of this concept, not only in application to matter, but also to that which he holds for the absolute being. He teaches concerning God, that He has produced His own being, that He was active before He was, Thilo, Kurze pragm. Gesch. d. Philos. I 352 f. Now Christian theology did speak of God that He was an ens a se, and thus of His aseitas. And also Lactantius, Synesius and Jerome used the expression causa sui; the latter wrote: Deus qui semper est nec habet aliunde principium et ipse sui origo est suaeque causa substantiae, non potest intelligi aliunde habere quod subsistit, Comm. ad Eph. cap. 3:15. But this expression was nevertheless always so understood, that God indeed existed from Himself but not that He had become and been produced from Himself, Klee, Kath. Dogm. II 43. When later Descartes gave precedence to the will of God above the understanding and let the essentia of all things depend upon that will, indeed even let the existence of God be a product of His will, so that he said, Deus se revera conservat, God is causa sui and a se, not in a negative but in a positive sense, God is causa efficiens sui ipsius, He has being from a real immensity of potency, Resp. ad primas objectiones p. 57, 58; then indeed some followers took over this expression, such as e.g. Burmannus, Synopsis theol. I c. 15 § 2, but the Reformed theologians would have the expression causa sui, existentia a se understood in no other way than in a purely negative sense, Ryssenius, De oude rechtsinnige waerheyt etc. Middelb. z.j. bl. 24. Mastricht Theol. theor. pract. II c. 3 § 22. Moor, I 590 sq. A causa sui in a positive sense is not possible, because one and the same thing would then at the same moment be said to exist, insofar as it produces itself, and not to exist, insofar as it is produced. Now it is understandable that monistic philosophy has taken refuge in this idea of the absolute becoming, in order to give at least an appearance of explanation of reality. But Herbart has rightly subjected this idea to a sharp critique, and his followers Thilo, Die Wissenschaftlichkeit der mod. Theol. S. 25 and Flügel, Die spekul. Theol. in der Gegenwart 1888 S. 201. f., Die Probleme der Philos. und ihre Lösungen 1888 S. 10 f. have not without reason given expression to their wonder over it, that this idea has made such an advance in speculative theology. For there is in theology, with application to the Divine being, nothing to be done with it. Not only does Scripture testify that there is in God no change nor shadow of turning, but thinking leads to the same conclusion. With becoming one must ask after a cause, for there is no becoming without cause. But being, in an absolute sense, no longer permits the question after a cause. Absolute being is, because it is. The idea of God brings immutability spontaneously with it. There is no increase or decrease thinkable in Him. He cannot change for better or for worse. For He is the absolute, perfect, true being. Becoming is proper to the creature and is a form of change in space and time. But God is, who He is, eternally, above space and time, far exalted above all creature. He rests in Himself and is therefore the goal and resting place of all creatures, the rock of salvation, whose work is perfect. Who attributes change to God, of being, knowledge or will, comes too near all His virtues, the dependence, the simplicity, the eternity, the omniscience, the omnipotence. He robs God of His Divine nature and religion of her firm ground and certain comfort. Yet this immutability is no monotone unity, no rigidly immovable being. Scripture itself precedes us, to describe God to us in the most manifold relations to all His creatures. Immutable in Himself, He nevertheless lives as it were the life of His creatures together with them and takes part in their changes. Scripture speaks of God in a human manner and cannot do otherwise. But however humanly it may speak, it forbids us at the same time to posit any change in God Himself. There is change around Him and outside Him, there is change in the relation to Him, but there is no change in God Himself. And herein consists precisely the inconceivable greatness of God and at the same time the glory of the Christian confession, that God immutable in Himself, can nevertheless call mutable creatures into existence; that He eternal in Himself, can nevertheless enter into time; that He immeasurable in Himself can nevertheless penetrate every point of space with His being; that He who is the absolute being, can nevertheless also grant to the becoming creature a proper place. In the eternity of God is no moment of time to be discovered, in His immensity no point of space, in His being no element of becoming. But conversely it is God who posits the creature, it is eternity which posits time, it is immensity which posits space, it is being which posits becoming, it is immutability which posits change. There is no transition between both; there is a deep chasm between the being of God and the being of all creature. It is Divine greatness, that He can descend to the creature; that He, transcendent, can nevertheless dwell immanently in all that is created; that He, preserving Himself, can give Himself and, absolutely maintaining His immutability, can nevertheless enter into an infinite number of relations to His creatures. With various examples one sought to elucidate this. The sun remains the same, whether it scorches or warms, causes pain or refreshes (Augustine). A coin changes not, though it is now called a price and then a pledge (id.). A pillar remains standing, whether someone sees it now at his right, then at his left hand (Thomas). An artist changes not, when he gives shape to his conception in word or tone, in voice or color, and a scholar not, when he lays down his thoughts in a book. All these comparisons limp, but they yet give some idea, how something, remaining identical in essence, can change in relation. With God this applies now so much the more, because He, the immutable, Himself is the only cause of all that changes. He does not place Himself in relation to any creature, as if this would exist in any way without Him, but He Himself places all things in those relations to Himself, which He eternally and immutably wills and precisely thus, in that way and in that moment of time, in which they actually take place. All prius and posterius falls not in God, but in rebus prius non existentibus et posterius existentibus, Aug. de civ. XII 17. It is the immutable being itself, that places the changing becoming outside itself with a wholly proper order and law and brings it on the stage before itself.


3. The immutability of God is called eternity with respect to time and omnipresence with respect to space. Both were often summarized under the name infinitas Dei. The concept of infinity is however in itself unclear. First it can be negatively conceived in the sense of endless. Something is then called infinite, because it actually has no end but yet can have one. Often in philosophy God has in this sense been called infinite. Neoplatonism conceived God in this sense as without limit and shape, without any determination, οὐ πεπερασμενος, ὁρος οἰκ ἐχων, ἀπειρος etc., an overflowing fullness, from which the world has emanated, Zeller, Philos. d. Gr. V 485 f. 497. In the same sense the Kabbalah spoke of God as ‎‏אֵין טוֹף‏‎, the infinite, without limit and form, but who in the ten sefiroth created a transition from the infinite to the finite, Frank, La Kabbale 179. Later the philosophy of Spinoza gave currency to this concept of the infinity of God. The substance, God, is with Spinoza no proper, distinct from the world being; it is that which constitutes the reality in the creatures, and therefore of itself infinite, ens absolute infinitum, Eth. I prop. 8. All determinatio is therefore negatio, a deprivation, a lack of existence, Epist. 50 and 41, God is however free from all limitation and restriction, He is substantia non determinata. Extension is one of His attributes. With Hegel the concept of infinity received yet again another meaning, because he conceived the substance of Spinoza not as an eternal immutable being but as an absolute becoming. God was therefore called infinite, because He could become all, approximately in the same manner as the ἀπειρον of Anaximander, which itself is undetermined but can produce all sorts of things. The error of this conception consists herein, that the most general, which the understanding obtains by abstraction from finite being, is identified with the infinite. For it was precisely the effort of the philosophy of identity, to let the particular proceed from the general, the determined from the undetermined, the finite from the infinite by a process. God is an sich infinitus potentiâ, He becomes finitus, personal, conscious, determined in the creatures as His revelation. But this conception is untenable. Infinite is no negative but a positive concept; it indicates not, that God is no proper, distinct from the creatures being, but that He is limited by nothing finite and creaturely. Now naturally one can on different manner deny such a creaturely limitation to God. If one means, that God non tempore finiri potest, then infinitas coincides with aeternitas. If one wishes to indicate, that God non loco finiri potest, then infinitas is the same as omnipraesentia. And thus the infinitas Dei is also often described, Polanus, Synt. theol. II c. 10. 11. Zanchius, Op. II 90. But infinitas can also be understood in this sense, that God is infinite in His virtues, that every virtue is present in Him in an absolute manner; then infinitas is as much as perfectio, Thomas, S. Theol. I qu. 7. But also then must the infinity of God be properly understood. The infinity of God is no infinitas magnitudinis, as sometimes is spoken of the infinite or endless magnitude of the world, for God is no body and has no extension. It is also no infinitas multitudinis, as mathematics speaks of infinitely small and infinitely great, for God is one and simple. But it is an infinitas essentiae. God is infinite according to His being, absolutely perfect, infinite in an intensive, qualitative, positive sense. But thus the infinity of God coincides entirely with perfection, and it need not be discussed separately.

Infinity in the sense of not-being-determined by time is the eternity of God. In Scripture nowhere is there mention of a beginning or an end of God's existence. Although He is very often represented as entering into time, He is nevertheless exalted above it. He is the First and the Last, Isa. 41:4, Apoc. 1:8, existing before the world, Gen. 1:1, John 1:1, 17:5, 24, and remaining despite all change, Ps. 102:27, 28. He is God from eternity to eternity, Ps. 90:2, 93:2. There is no searching of the number of His years, Job 36:26. A thousand years are to Him as little as the day of yesterday to us, Ps. 90:4, 2 Pet. 3:8. He is the eternal God, Isa. 40:28, Rom. 16:26, dwelling in eternity, Isa. 57:15, living in eternity, Deut. 32:40, Apoc. 10:6, 15:7, who swears by His life, Num. 14:21, 28, the θεος ζων και μενων, 1 Pet. 1:23, incorruptible, Rom. 1:23, immortal, 1 Tim. 6:16, who is and was and shall be, Ex. 3:14, Apoc. 1:4, 8. Very certainly Scripture speaks also here of God in a human manner, and of eternity in the forms of time, but it indicates nevertheless clearly at the same time, that God is exalted above time and not to be measured or determined by this standard. The deism of earlier and later time however understands under eternity an endlessly prolonged time forwards and backwards; the difference between time and eternity lies only in the quantity, not in the quality; it is gradual, not essential. The distinction lies not therein, that in eternity there is no succession of moments, but that it is without beginning and end. Past, present and future are there not only for man, but they are there also for and in God. Thus taught the Socinians, Socinus, Prael. theol. c. 8. Crell, De Deo et ejus attributis c. 18. Catech. Racov. qu. 60, cf. Fock, Der Socinianismus S. 427 f.; likewise Reinhard, Dogm. S. 106. Wegscheider, Instit. theol. § 63. Dorner, Glaub. I 132. Ges. Schriften 322 etc. From the other side eternity and time are likewise confused by pantheism. God and world relate themselves here as natura naturans and natura naturata, Spinoza, Eth. I prop. 29. Eternity is not essentially distinguished from time, but is the substance, the immanent cause of time, and this is the modus, the accidens of eternity, as the wave is the appearance-form of the ocean; God Himself is pulled down into the stream of time and comes only in time to His full reality, Spinoza, Cog. Metaph. I c. 4. II c. 1. Hegel, Encycl. der philos. Wiss. § 257 f. Hartmann, Philos. des Unbew. I⁹ S. 281 f. 298 f. Biedermann, Dogm. II 518 f. Strauss expressed it clearly in his Glaub. I 562: Ewigkeit und Zeit verhalten sich wie die Substanz und ihre Accidentien. And Schleiermacher described the eternity of God cautiously as seine mit allem Zeitlichen auch die Zeit selbst bedingende schlechthin zeitlose Ursächlichkeit Gottes. Now Christian theology has also in this perfection of God to avoid both deism and pantheism. Naturally the distinction between eternity and time lies also therein, that the one has a beginning and end or at least can have one and the other not. But therein does not lie the whole difference. There are three notae of the concept eternity, namely that it excludes principium, finem and also successionem. God is ἀγεννητος, ἀφθαρτος but also immutabilis, Petavius, de Deo III c. 3
