§ 20. THE INCOMPREHENSIBILITY OF GOD.


1. Mystery is the vital element of dogmatics. To be sure, Scripture understands by μυστηριον no abstract supernatural truth in the Roman sense; but it is equally far removed from the thought that the believer would understand and comprehend the revealed mysteries in a scientific sense, cf. part I 532. Rather, the knowledge which God has revealed of Himself in nature and Scripture far surpasses the representation and conception of man. Insofar as this is the case, everything with which dogmatics deals is mystery. For it has to do not with finite creatures, but from beginning to end it raises itself above all creation to the Eternal and the Infinite Himself. Immediately as it makes a beginning, it stands before the Incomprehensible. From Him it takes its beginning, for from Him are all things. But also in the further loci, as it descends to the creatures, it considers these in no other way than in their relation to God, inasmuch as they are from and through and to Him. Thus the knowledge of God is the sole dogma, the exclusive content of the whole of dogmatics. All doctrines that are treated in it, concerning the world, concerning man, concerning Christ, etc., are but the explication of the one, central dogma of the cognitio Dei. From Him everything is viewed. Under Him everything is subsumed. To Him everything is traced back. It is always God and God alone, whose glory in creation and re-creation, in nature and grace, in world and church, it has to contemplate and describe. It is His knowledge alone that it must display and set forth. Thereby dogmatics does not become a dry, scholastic science, without fruit for life. The more it contemplates Him, whose knowledge is its sole content, the more it will pass over into admiration and adoration. If only it never forgets to think and speak about _things_ instead of about _words_; if only it remains a Theologie der Thatsachen and does not degenerate into a Theologie der Rhetorik, it is, as a scientific description of the knowledge of God, also supremely fruitful for life. For the knowledge of God in Christ is life itself, Ps. 89:16; Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34; John 17:3. Therefore Augustine desired to know nothing other and nothing more than God and himself: Deum et animam scire cupio. Nihilne plus? Nihil omnino. Therefore Calvin began his Institutio with the knowledge of God and of ourselves. And therefore the Catechism of Geneva gave to the first question: quis humanae vitae praecipuus est finis? as answer: ut Deum, a quo conditi sunt homines, ipsi noverint, cf. also the Catech. of Westminster.
