§ 24. Classification of the Names of God.

1. Holy Scripture calls God by many names, but never proceeds from an abstract concept of God. Never does it exalt one attribute of God at the expense of the other. To be sure, now one, then again the other attribute comes more to the foreground, but between all attributes there is perfect harmony. It is the intention of Scripture to bring all the virtues of God equally to His honor. Just as the person of Christ does not represent a particular one-sided character or temperament and yet is a person full of life and reality, so also God in His revelation is always unfolding all His virtues in harmonious coherence. Nowhere is there mention of the essence of God in abstracto. The Hebrew word ‎‏תּוּשִׁיָּה‏‎ from the root ‎‏יָשָׁה‏‎; existence, being, Arab. III to help, to set up, indicates that which has permanence, is enduring, provides benefit, in concreto especially true wisdom and blessedness, Job 5:12, 6:13, 12:16, 26:3 (30:22), Prov. 2:7, 3:21, 8:14 and further only Isa. 28:29, Mic. 6:9, but stands in none of these places for the essence of God, cf. Delitzsch on Job 5:12. Neither can the N. T. words θεοτης Col. 2:9, θειοτης Rom. 1:29, μορφη θεου Phil. 2:6, θεια φυσις 2 Pet. 1:4 cf. Gal. 4:8 prove that there of the essence or nature of God in distinction from His attributes is spoken, as Polanus would have it, Synt. theol. p. 135. God's essence becomes known to us in His revelation, that is, in His names. The names of God are designations of His ἀρεται, 1 Pet. 2:9. This usage of language attaches itself to Isa. 42:8, 12. 43:21. 63:5, where the Hebrew ‎‏תְּהִּלָה‏‎ praise, honor, in the LXX is translated by ἀρετη, cf. Hab. 3:3. Zech. 6:13. The church has the calling to proclaim the virtues of God, that is, to give Him honor for the δοξα, which is displayed in all His works. Of a description of God's essence, apart from the attributes, there is never mention in Holy Scripture. In the earliest period something similar was also not attempted in Christian theology. Under the nomina Dei everything was summarized that one had to say of God. The names of God were indication not only of the nomina propria but also of what were later so called the attributes and even of the persons in the Divine essence, Clemens Alex. Strom. V 12. Augustinus, de doctr. chr. I 5. Pseudodion., de div. nom. c. 1 sq. Damascenus, de fide orth. I c. 12. Thomas, S. Theol. I qu. 13. Catech. Rom. I c. 2 qu. 11. 13. Kleutgen, Theol. der Vorzeit I² S. 211 f. Gerhard, Loci Theol. loc. 2. Hyperius, Meth. Theol. p. 89 sq. c. 3. Polanus, Synt. Theol. Lib. 2 c. 6. Zanchius, Op. II col. 9. 10. Walaeus, Op. I p. 152 sq. Alsted, Theol. did. schol. p. 61. The attributes were thus immediately included in the idea of God; thus, e.g., in Irenaeus, adv. haer. I c. 14. II c. 13., 35 etc. Augustinus certainly speaks of God's essentia, but he understands thereby the fullness of His being and immediately includes all attributes, simplicity, eternity, goodness, wisdom, etc., therein. In the confessions one also frequently speaks of God in that manner, without distinction of essence and attributes, and without classification of the attributes, Conc. Lateran. in Denzinger, Enchir. symb. n. 355, Conc. Vatic. de fide c. 1. Conf. Aug. art. 1. Conf. Gall. art. 1. Scot. art. 1. Belg. art. 1. Conf. Westm. cap. 2. And also later many theologians do not enter into these distinctions and treat the attributes, without first speaking of the nature of God, e.g., Thomas. S. Theol. I qu. 3 sq. Ursinus, Tract. theol. p. 46-70.

2. But soon a distinction nevertheless arose. One was led thereto by the question, what was the attribute which immediately distinguished God from all creatures, what was the fundamental concept and from which one thus had to proceed in the doctrine of God. Now the Platonic philosophy had already sought that fundamental concept in being, and Philo had connected this with the name Ihvh, the only name which did not indicate an operation or power but the very essence of God, and therefore frequently called God ὁ ὠν or το ὀν, Zeller, Philos. V³ 356. This description of the essence of God was taken over in Christian theology. Irenaeus describes God frequently as absolutely simple, adv. haer. II c. 13. 28 IV 11 and calls Him even inexcogitabilis et insubstantivus, I c. 14, but emphasizes against Gnosticism especially that God is the Creator of all things and that He has revealed Himself in His works, Harnack D. G. I 485 f. In contrast, in Origen, de princ. I 1 sq. c. Cels. VI 64. VII 42-51, Athanasius, de decr. nic. syn. c. 11, Damascenus, de fide orth. I c. 2. 4. 9. etc. cf. Harnack D. G. II 119 f. Schwane, Dogm. I 132 II 35, Kattenbusch, Vergl. Confessionskunde I 310 f., God is the One, the Being, indeed the One exalted above all being, ὁ ὠν, ὁ ὠν ¡καθ’ἑαυτον, το ὀν, who is being itself, who has being from and through Himself. And following in Philo's footsteps this was all derived from or tied to the name of Ihvh in the O. T. In the West these determinations were taken over. Augustinus describes God repeatedly as summum esse, summum bonum, verum, pulchrum etc. God is a substantia, for what is not a substance does not exist, Enarr. in Ps. 67. But, because the word substantia is frequently used in contrast with accidentia, which inhere in the substance and have it as their subject, Augustinus prefers to use for God the word essentia, quam Graeci οὐσιαν vocant and for which also the word natura is used, de trin. V 2 VII 5 sq. de civ. XII, 2. de doctr. chr. I 6. For in God there is no distinction between substance and accidents; His being is no subject of the attributes, but these are identical with the being itself. God is the highest, best, most beautiful, most perfect being, quo esse aut cogitari melius nihil possit, de lib. arb. II 6. de doctr. chr. I 7. He is Deus, supra quem nihil, extra quem nihil, sine quo nihil est; summa vita, summa veritas, summa beatitudo, summa sapientia, summa essentia, de civ. XII 2. Solil. I 1. And Augustinus also appeals for this description of God to the name Ihvh, de trin. V 2. VII 5. de doctr. chr. I 32. This same description we then find repeatedly later, in Hilary, de trin. I c. 1 sq. Pseudodion., de div. nom. cap. 1. § 6, who however cap. 4 § 1 proceeds from the idea of the good and c. 5 § 1 says that this extends still further than that of being, Anselm, Monol. c. 28. Prosl. c. 17 sq. Lombard, Sent. I dist. 8. Thomas, S. Theol. I qu. 2 art. 3 and qu. 3. S. c. Gent. I c. 16 sq. Bonaventure, Brevil. I cap. 2. Sent. I dist. 8. etc. Petavius, Theol. lib. 1 c. 6. Perrone, Prael. theol. II 81-90. C. Pesch, Prael. II 46-70. Jansen II p. 26-46. Although this now became the common sentiment, there were nevertheless those who chose a different point of departure. They sought the fundamental concept not in the absolute being, in the esse a se (aseitas), but in infinity; and they therefore preferred to describe the essence of God as an ens infinitum. Thus did Duns Scotus, who asserted that being could be attributed univocally, in univocal sense, to God and to the creature, but that the distinguishing mark between God and the creature lay therein, that God was an ens infinitum and the creatures were finite, Sent. I dist. 3 qu. 1. and dist. 8 qu. 3. Furthermore there were still some Thomists, who thought that the proper essence of God lay in the intellectual nature and they therefore described God as ens intelligens, such as, e.g., Gotti, cf. Perrone, Prael. theol. II p. 82. Kleutgen, Theol. der Vorzeit I² 229.

3. The Reformation brought no change in this conception. One joined oneself to the one or the other description. The Reformed took over at least in the earliest period mostly the description of Augustinus and Thomas. They proceeded from the concept of aseitas or of independentia and frequently described God as an ens independens, Zwingli, Op. III 155 sq. IV 81 sq. Hyperius, Meth. Theol. p. 87. Martyr, Loci Comm. p. 39b. Polanus Synt. Theol. lib. II c. 5. Zanchius, Op. II col. 49 sq. Ursinus, Tract. theol. 1584 p. 46 sq. Alongside this there also occur the descriptions of God as spiritus increatus, spiritus simplicissimus, spiritus a se ipso existens, sometimes still supplemented with the trinitarian formula unus essentia, trinus personis, Heppe, Dogm. der ev. ref. K. S. 35 f. Schweizer, Gl. der ev. ref. K. I 244 f. The Lutherans used the definition essentia spiritualis infinita, ens spirituale a se subsistens, spiritus independens, Schmid, Dogm. der ev. luth. K⁶. S. 73-77. Hase, Hutt. red. § 54. In contrast Socinianism took a different position. Disregarding all metaphysical questions, it laid emphasis only upon the will of God. The knowledge of God consists only in the knowledge of His will. Religion loses all mysticism and dissolves into cultus. God comes increasingly to distance Himself from world and humanity. In Remonstrantism, rationalism and English deism this is continued, cf. above p. 15. 16. Against this cold, moralistic concept of God reaction came again from the side of philosophy. Spinoza returned to the idea of being, conceived God as substantia unica, infinita, necessario existens, ens absolute infinitum, absolute causa prima et immanens, Eth. I prop. 7 sq. and spoke again of a love of God, amor Dei intellectualis, which granted the highest blessedness, Eth. V prop. 15 sq. Although rationalism and deism still remained dominant after Spinoza, around the middle of the 18th century one became increasingly weary of this. The great minds, Goethe, Lessing, Herder felt themselves attracted to Spinoza, and soon his pantheism made entry into philosophy. Kant already undermined the foundations of rationalism, although he still called himself a deist, Drews, Die deutsche Spekul. I 104. Fichte undertook the struggle against the concepts God and immortality as products of eudaemonism. In his exaggerated moralism God was to him identical with the pure I, with the moral world-order; God was no being, no substance but absolutes Thun, Thätigkeit; thus in his Wissenschaftslehre 1794, Ueber den Grund unseres Glaubens an eine göttliche Weltregierung 1798, Appellation an das Publikum 1799. Later he partially recanted this and aligned himself more closely with Spinoza, Anweisung zum seligen Leben oder Religionslehre 1806. Schleiermacher showed still stronger agreement with Spinoza. God and world are correlata, Dialektik S. 162. God is the Woher unseres empfänglichen und selbsthätigen Daseins, Glaub. I⁵ S. 20. Schelling distinguished himself from both thereby, that he took account not only of the spiritual, religion, morals but also of objective nature. It was his goal to lift natural science out of the deplorable state in which it found itself. And thus he then took both together, nature and spirit; nature is visible spirit, spirit invisible nature; he sees in both a continuous, organic revelation of the Absolute, that is exalted above all oppositions, one, simple, eternal, without predicates, unity of the infinite and the finite, of God and world, ἑν και παν, Drews, Die deutsche Spekul. I S. 201 f. Finally Hegel transformed this system into a logical idealism. Nature and history are a logically necessary self-unfolding of the idea. Everything is rational, everything is embodied thought. Reason is thus the absolute substance, it is God Himself. For God is nothing other than the one, living world-idea developing to self-consciousness. God is thus in Hegel indeed reason, thought, spirit, subject, but not in the sense that He would have an own life for and outside the world. Ohne Welt ist Gott nicht Gott, the world is an essential moment in the life of God, Drews, Die deutsche Spekul. I 229 f.
