§ 20. THE INCOMPREHENSIBILITY OF GOD.

1. Mystery is the vital element of dogmatics. To be sure, Scripture does not understand by μυστηριον an abstract supernatural truth in the Roman sense; but it is equally far removed from the thought that the believer would understand and comprehend the revealed mysteries in a scientific sense, cf. vol. I 532. Rather, the knowledge which God has revealed of Himself in nature and Scripture far exceeds human representation and concept. Insofar, everything with which dogmatics deals is mystery. For it does not have to do with finite creatures, but from beginning to end it elevates itself above all creation to the Eternal and the Infinite Himself. Immediately as it makes a beginning, it stands before the Incomprehensible. From Him it takes its beginning, for from Him are all things. But also in the further loci, as it descends to the creatures, it views them in no other way than in their relation to God, as they are from and through and to Him. Thus the knowledge of God is the only dogma, the exclusive content of the whole of dogmatics. All doctrines treated in it, concerning the world, concerning man, concerning Christ, etc., are but the explication of the one, central dogma of the cognitio Dei. From Him everything is viewed. Under Him everything is subsumed. To Him everything is traced back. It is always God and God alone, whose glory in creation and re-creation, in nature and grace, in world and church she has to contemplate and describe. It is His knowledge alone which she must display and set forth. Thereby dogmatics does not become a barren, scholastic science, without fruit for life. The more she contemplates Him, whose knowledge is her only content, the more she will pass over into admiration and adoration. If only she never forgets to think and speak about _things_ instead of about _words_; if only she remains a Theology of Thatsachen and does not degenerate into a Theology of Rhetorik, she is as a scientific description of the knowledge of God also most fruitful for life. For the knowledge of God in Christ is life itself, Ps. 89:16; Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34; John 17:3. Therefore Augustine desired to know nothing else and nothing more than God and himself: Deum et animam scire cupio. Nihilne plus? Nihil omnino. Therefore Calvin began his Institutes with the knowledge of God and of ourselves. And therefore the Catechism of Geneva gave to the first question—quis humanae vitae praecipuus est finis?—the answer: ut Deum, a quo conditi sunt homines, ipsi noverint, cf. also the Catech. of Westminster.

But as soon as we undertake to speak about God, the question arises how we shall be able to do so. We are human and He is the Lord our God. There seems to exist between Him and us no kinship and no communion such that we could name Him according to truth. There is between Him and us a distance as between the infinite and the finite, between eternity and time, between Being and becoming, between the all and the nothing. How little we know of God, already the weakest notion includes that He is a being infinitely exalted above all creature. And Scripture not only confirms that, it places that majesty and exaltation of the Lord of lords before us first in full light. Already the first chapter of Genesis depicts His incomprehensible exaltation; He speaks and it is there. And although Scripture then subsequently describes God in His condescending love, and says that He dwells with him who is of a contrite and humble spirit, yet He is the High and Lofty One who inhabits eternity, Isa. 57:15. God is great, and we do not understand it, Job 26:14, 36:26, 37:5. He is incomparable, Isa. 40:18, 25, 46:5, dwelling in darkness, 1 Kings 8:12; Isa. 45:15, in unapproachable light, 1 Tim. 6:16. No one has seen Him or can see Him, Ex. 33:20; John 1:18, 6:46; 1 Tim. 6:16. The hidden ground, the depth of God, ‎‏חֵקֶר‏‎, and the limit, the utmost, the essence of the Almighty, ‎‏תַּכְלִית‏‎, cannot be reached, Job 11:7; Eccl. Sir. 43:34, 35. He is Spirit, without form, Deut. 4:12, 15; John 4:24, 5:37, above all that is creaturely, above need, Job 22:2, 3; Acts 17:25; change, Jas. 1:17; time, Isa. 41:4, 44:6, 48:12; Rev. 1:8, 22:13; space, Acts 17:27, 28 etc., infinitely exalted. He cannot be described and called by no name. He is without name, His name is wonderful, Gen. 32:29; Judg. 13:18; Prov. 30:4.

2. Even outside the domain of special revelation this exaltation of God has been recognized. Among the Brahmans God is the Unknowable, without names and attributes, known only by him who does not know, Hoekstra, Wijsbegeerte der Godsdienst II 2. Hartmann, Religionsphilos. I 278 ff. The Koran describes Allah many times in a very anthropomorphic manner, but among the followers of Mohammed there were many who insisted on interpreting this description spiritually and even denied all attributes to God, Dozy, Het Islamisme p. 131 ff. Houtsma, De strijd over het dogma in den Islam tot op El-Ash’ari 1875 p. 120 ff. Saussaye, Lehrb. der Rel. II 385. Also Greek philosophy has many times clearly recognized and expressed this unknowability of God. According to the well-known story the philosopher Simonides repeatedly requested longer postponement for the answer to the question of the tyrant Hiero, who God was, Cic. de nat. deor. I 22. According to Diogenes Protagoras began his book about the gods thus: περι μεν θεων οὐκ ἐχω εἰδεναι οὐδ’ ὡς εἰσιν οὐδ’ ὡς οὐκ εἰσιν πολλα γαρ τα κωλυοντα εἰδεναι, ἡ τ’ ἀδηλοτης και βραχυς ὠν ὁ βιος των ἀνθρωπων, Ritter et Preller, Hist. phil. gr. 183. Cic. de nat. deor. I 63. Carneades of Cyrene subjected belief in the gods not only to sharp criticism, but also contested the possibility of forming a concept of God. Plato rejected all anthropomorphic and anthropopathic representations of the Deity and declared in the Timaeus § 34: τον μεν οὐν ποιητην και πατερα τονδε του παντος εὑρειν τε ἐργον και εὑροντα εἰς παντας ἀδυνατον λεγειν, Zeller, Philos. der Gr. II 4 928 ff. And in similar sense he says in the Republic VI 19, that the Deity or the idea of the good is exalted not only above all that exists, but also above Being itself, ἐπεκεινα πασες οὐσιας. Philo combined this Platonic philosophy with the teaching of the O. T. and found the same thought expressed in the name Ihvh. Not only is God free from all imperfection present in finite, changeable, dependent creatures; no, God also far surpasses all perfection of creatures. He is better than virtue, knowledge, beauty, purer than unity, more blessed than blessedness. He is actually without attributes, ἀποιος, and without names, and therefore cannot be comprehended and described. According to His essence God is unknowable. We can know that He is, but not what He is. Only Being can in the proper sense be ascribed to Him; the name Ihvh is the only one that indicates His essence, Zeller, Philos. d. Gr. V³ 353 ff. Dähne, Gesch. Darstellung der jüdisch-alex. Religionsphilos. 1834 I 114 ff. Schürer, Neutest. Zeitgesch. 1874 S. 655 ff. Plotinus went the farthest. Plato attributed many properties to God. Philo filled his negative theology with a positive one, in which he describes God as a personal, almighty, perfect being. But with Plotinus there is nothing to say of God except only negatively. God is absolutely one, exalted above all multiplicity and therefore also not to be described by thought, the good, even not by Being, for all these determinations still include a multiplicity. God as pure unity is indeed the cause of thought, Being, the good, but He is Himself distinguished from them and stands transcendent above them. He is unlimited, infinite, without form, and so distinguished from all creature that even activity, life, thought, consciousness, being, cannot be ascribed to Him. He is unreachable for our thought and for our language. We cannot say what He is, but only what He is not. Even the designations of το ἑν and το ἀγαθον, which Plotinus generally employs, are no description of God's essence, but only of His relation to the creatures, and indicate nothing but His absolute causality, Zeller, ib. 476-496. Even greater became the distance between God and His creature in Gnosticism. It made an absolute separation between the highest God and the world. In nature, in Israel, in Christianity there was no essential revelation of God but only of the aeons. There was therefore no theologia naturalis, neither insita nor acquisita, and likewise no theologia revelata. The highest God was absolutely unknowable and unreachable for the creature; He was βυθος ἀγνωστος, ἀρρητος, eternal σιγη, Iren., adv. haer. I 11. 24.

3. But this doctrine of the incomprehensibility of God and of the unknowability of His essence has also been the point of departure and fundamental thought of Christian theology. God does not exhaust Himself in His revelation, neither in creation nor in re-creation. He cannot fully communicate Himself to creatures, for then these would themselves have to be God. Therefore there is no adequate knowledge of God. There is no name that makes us know His essence. There is no concept that fully comprehends Him. There is no description that fully determines Him. What lies behind revelation is altogether unknowable. We can approach it neither with our thought or imagination, nor with our language. Already the Epistle of Barnabas ch. 5 asks: if the Son of God had not come in the flesh, how then would men have seen Him and remained saved? Justin Martyr calls God ineffable, immovable, nameless, Apol. I 61; also words such as Father, God, Lord are not proper names ἀλλ’ ἐκ των εὐποιϊων και των ἐργων προσρησεις, Apol. II 6. God cannot appear, cannot go, cannot be seen, etc.; if this is spoken of in the O. T., this refers to the Son, who is His messenger, Dial. 127. Also in Irenaeus, adv. haer. IV 20 there appears the contrast—very common in his time but nevertheless incorrect and partly Gnostic—between the Father, who is hidden, invisible, unknowable, and the Son, who has revealed Him. In Clement of Alexandria God is pure μονας, Strom. V 11. If we think away all that is creaturely, we do not reach what God is, but what He is not. Form, motion, place, number, attribute, name, etc. cannot be ascribed to Him. If we nevertheless call Him one, good, Father, Creator, Lord, etc., then with this we do not express His proper essence but only indicate His power, Strom. V 12. He is even exalted above the one, ὑπερ αὐτην την μοναδα, Paedag. I 8. In one word, God is, as Athanasius, c. gent. 2 says, ἐπεκεινα πασης οὐσιας και ἀνθρωπινης ἐννοιας. And likewise speak Orig., de princ. I 1, 5. sq. c. Cels. VI 65. Eusebius, Praep. Evang. V 1. Theophilus, ad Autol. I 3. Tatianus. c. Gr. 5. Minucius Felix. Octav. c. 18. Novatianus, de trin. 2. Cyprianus, de idol. vanit. 5. Lactantius, Instit. div. I 6. Cf. Münscher- v. Coelln, Dogmengesch. I 132 ff. Hagenbach, Dogm. § 37. Schwane, Dogmengesch. I² 72 ff. We find the same representation also in Augustine and John of Damascus. Augustine proceeds in the description of God from the concept of Being. He is Being, as His name Ihvh also indicates; this is His proper name, His nomen in se; all other names are ad nos, Serm. 6 n. 4. Serm. 7 n. 7. Therefore, if we wish to say what He is, we say only what He is not in distinction from all finite substances. He is ineffabilis. Facilius dicemus quid non sit quam quid sit. He is no earth, sea, heaven, angel, etc., nothing of all that the creature is; hoc solum potui dicere quid non sit, Enarr. in Ps. 85 n. 12. de doctr. chr. I 6, de ord. II 47. He is thought thus, ut aliquid quo nihil melius sit atque sublimius illa cogitatio conetur attingere, de doctr. chr. I 7. But He cannot be thought as He is. For He is exalted above all that is bodily, changeable, become, tract. 23 in Ev. Joh. n. 9. Quis est autem, qui sic cogitat Deum, quemadmodum ille est? quaest. in Jos. VI 29. He is incomprehensible and must be so, si enim comprehendis, non est Deus, Serm. 117 n. 5. And when we then finally wish to say what we think of Him, we struggle with language. Verius enim cogitatur Deus quam dicitur, et verius est quam cogitatur, de trin. VII 4, de doctr. chr. I 6. If we nevertheless say something concerning Him, then it is not adaequaat, but serves only to make us say something and to make us think of a being that surpasses all, de doctr. chr. I 6. Sicut Deus a nullo intellectu valet proprie cogitari, ita nulla definitione potest proprie definiri aut determinari, de cogn. verae vitae 7. Deus scitur melius nesciendo, de ord. II 44. Likewise Damascene says that God is το θειον, ἀρρητον και ἀκαταληπτον, de fide orth. I c. 1. We speak of God in our way and know what God has revealed of Himself; but what God's essence is and how He is in all, we do not know, ib. c. 2. That God is, is clear; but τι ἐστιν κατ’ οὐσιαν και φυσιν, ἀκαταληπτον τουτο παντελως και ἀγνωστον. That God is unbegotten, immutable, without beginning, etc., says only what He is not. To say what He is, is impossible. He is nothing of all Being, not because He is not, but because He is ὑπερ παντα τα ὀντα και ὑπερ αὐτο το εἰναι. What we say positively of God does not indicate His nature, but the relations of His nature, τα περι την φυσιν, ib. c. 4 cf. c. 9.
